Tilman, 1994, Ecology, COMPETITION AND BIODIVERSITY IN SPATIALLY STRUCTURED HABITATS

However, because each individual organism exists at a discrete point in space, there are unavoidable site-to-site differences in the local biotic composition of a habitat caused by random colonization and mortality. This occurs even though the underlying physical environment is homogeneous with no physical barriers to dispersal (e.g., Pacala and Silander 1990). Thus, the discreteness of individual organisms means that all organisms live in a spatially structured, subdivided habitat.

Despite its potential importance, spatial structure frequently has been ignored by field workers and theoreticians, myself included, because it greatly increases the types and amounts of data needed for field studies and complicates mathematical theory. However, there is increasingly strong evidence that spatial subdivision is an essential factor controlling the species dynamics and biodiversity of many communities.

Aspects of these questions have been addressed in models of competition and dispersal in subdivided habitats (e.g., Levins 1969, Levin 1974, 1976, Yodzis 1978, Hastings 1980, Hanski 1982, 1983, 1989, Shmida and Ellner 1984, Harrison et al. 1988, Gotelli 1991, Nee and May 1992), and in papers that treat space as if it were just another essential resource (Platt and Weis 1977, Tilman 1982).

**As Pacala (1986a, b), Ives (1988), and Hanski and Cambefort (1991) have shown, neighborhood interactions and local dispersal increase intraspecific competition relative to interspecific, and thus encourage stable coexistence.**

The multispecies model developed here demonstrates that spatial subdivision has similar effects on competitors, allowing a potentially unlimited number of species to stably coexist in a physically homogeneous, equilibrial habitat.

This model, which I call the _spatial competition hypothesis_, provides an alternative explanation for the high species richness of many communities of sessile organisms. It demonstrates that the concept of stable coexistence of a competitor and a fugitive (e.g., MacArthur and Wilson 1967, Horn and MacArthur 1972) can be extended to an unlimited number of species. Coexistence occurs even though a single species would displace all others from any given site. Diversity does not require large-scale disturbances, but can occur through plant-by-plant replacement in a subdivided habitat in which all species are limited by and compete for a single resource. Spatial subdivision, which is an unavoidable result of the sessile life-style, thus may be a major factor favoring high local diversity in communities of sessile organisms.

What might limit diversity in such a system? The spatial competition model assumed that a habitat was infinitely large. For instance, species n was assumed to be able to invade and stably persist if jn > 0. In a finite habitat, there are a finite number of sites, and a species will be present only if it always occurs in at least one site. This means that a species would go extinct if its abundance fell below some minimum value, Pmin, which should be inversely dependent on area.

Demographic stochasticity would further reduce species richness. Demographic stochasticity is the temporal variance in population density caused by randomness in the reproduction and mortality of individuals (May 1973).

Dispersal limitation might also explain latitudinal diversity gradients. Glaciations and associated climatic changes are greater toward the poles. Species that presently occupy more poleward habitats have had to migrate great distances in response to climatic change (Davis 1981, 1986) and have experienced major range contractions. These would have increased the chance of extinction of temperate or arctic species, especially less well-dispersed species. If historical climatic changes led to shorter migration distances per unit time in subtropical or tropical habitats than in temperate and arctic habitats, the more equatorial habitats would have experienced lower extinction rates and thus have greater species richness.

The spatial competition hypothesis provides an alternative explanation for species-rich plant communities. Tree species differ in dispersal and longevity (e.g., Howe et al. 1985, Lieberman and Lieberman 1993). **If there are the requisite interspecific trade-offs among dispersal, longevity, and competitive ability**, the spatial competition model demonstrates that these could allow stable persistence of numerous species competing for a single resource. Although this coexistence requires limiting similarity, most rain forest trees are rare. The model predicts that rare species can be quite similar and still stably coexist (Eqs. 10 and 13).

**This paper has focused on interactions within a physically homogeneous habitat. An alternative explanation for species diversity is that habitats are spatially heterogeneous, and that such heterogeneity allows coexistence (e.g., Tilman 1982). Soils have considerable heterogeneity in nutrient content, and sites differ in slope, elevation, aspect, and microclimate. Plant species can be differentiated with respect to each of these factors, and such differentiation may be a major cause of the changes in life-form and species composition along environmental gradients, including geographic gradients (Tilman 1988). However, within any small and fairly homogeneous region, such differentiation may be a less important determinant of diversity than the effects of competition in a spatially subdivided habitat.**

There are a variety of observational and experimental tests for determining if the diversity of a community is explained by the spatial competition hypothesis. This theory requires a two-way or three-way trade-off among colonization ability, competitive ability, and longevity.

If the organisms living in a community do not have appropriate trade-offs among competition, dispersal, and longevity, the spatial competition hypothesis cannot explain the biodiversity of that community.

Spatial structure is an unavoidable result of the discrete nature of individual organisms. It may allow an almost unlimited number of competing species to stably coexist in a physically homogeneous habitat, even though a single species is the superior competitor in any given site. The spatial competition hypothesis thus must be added to the list of hypotheses that may explain the existence of highly diverse communities (reviewed in Tilman and Pacala 1993). With few exceptions, **all that is required to explain the stable coexistence of a large number of species are interspecific trade-offs in traits that determine responses to major environmental limiting factors.** Tests of these alternative hypotheses are clearly needed.